University of Westminster
School of Computer Science and Engineering
5COSC022W
Client-Server Architectures - Coursework (2025/26)
Module leader
Hamed Hamzeh
Unit
Coursework
Weighting:
60%
Qualifying mark
30%
Description
REST API design, development and implementation.
This assignment contributes towards the following Learning Outcomes (LOS):
Learning Outcomes
Covered in this
Assignment:
LO1 Gain a thorough understanding of RESTful principles and
their application in API design.
LO2 Acquire familiarity with the JAX-RS framework as a tool for
building RESTful APIs in Java.
Handed Out:
February 2026
Due Date
24th April 2026, 13:00
Expected deliverables
A public GitHub repo link contains all parts of the project
Method of Submission:
Video demonstration
Report included in README.md file in Github
Electronic submission on Blackboard via a provided link close to
the submission time.
Type of Feedback and
Due Date:
Written feedback within 15 working days.
BCS CRITERIA MEETING
IN THIS ASSIGNMENT
2.1.1 Knowledge and understanding of facts, concepts, principles
& theories
2.1.2 Use of such knowledge in modelling and design
2.1.3 Problem solving strategies
2.2.1 Specify, design or construct computer-based systems
2.2.4 Deploy tools effectively
2.3.2 Development of general transferable skills
3.1.1 Deploy systems to meet business goals
4.1.1 Knowledge and understanding of scientific and engineering
principles
4.1.3 Knowledge and understanding of computational modelling
1
Assessment regulations
Refer to section 4 of the ”How you study” guide for undergraduate students for a clarification
of how you are assessed, penalties and late submissions, what constitutes plagiarism etc.
Penalty for Late Submission
If you submit your coursework late but within 24 hours or one working day of the specified
deadline, 10 marks will be deducted from the final mark, as a penalty for late submission,
except for work which obtains a mark in the range 40-49%, in which case the mark will
be capped at the pass mark (40%). If you submit your coursework more than 24 hours or
more than one working day after the specified deadline you will be given a mark of zero
for the work in question unless a claim of Mitigating Circumstances has been submitted
and accepted as valid.
It is recognised that on occasion, illness or a personal crisis can mean that you fail to sub-
mit a piece of work on time. In such cases you must inform the Campus Office in writing
on a mitigating circumstances form, giving the reason for your late or non-submission.
You must provide relevant documentary evidence with the form. This information will
be reported to the relevant Assessment Board that will decide whether the mark of zero
shall stand. For more detailed information regarding University Assessment Regulations,
please refer to the following website:
http://www.westminster.ac.uk/study/current-students/resources/
academic-regulations
Learning Goals:
- Define key principles of REST architecture.
- Differentiate between RESTful and non-RESTful APIs.
- Recognize the importance of resource-based interactions.
- Understand the role of JAX-RS in Java-based API development.
- Explore JAX-RS annotations for resource mapping and HTTP method handling.
- Implement basic resource classes using JAX-RS.
Coursework: Developing a JAX-RS RESTful Service (Total 100 Marks)
Module: Client-Server Architectures
Title: ”Smart Campus” Sensor & Room Management API
Weight: 60% of final grade
1. Introduction & Scenario
Scenario: You have been appointed as the Lead Backend Architect for the university’s
”Smart Campus” initiative. What began as a pilot project for tracking individual tempera-
ture sensors has evolved into a comprehensive campus-wide infrastructure project. The
university now requires a robust, scalable, and highly available RESTful API to manage
2
thousands of Rooms and the diverse array of Sensors (e.g., CO2 monitors, occupancy
trackers, smart lighting controllers) contained within them.
This system will be built as a high-performance web service using JAX-RS (Jakarta RESTful
Web Services). Your goal is to provide a seamless interface for campus facilities managers
and automated building systems to interact with the campus data.
Objective: This coursework is designed to simulate a real-world development task. It
assesses your proficiency in RESTful architectural patterns, the implementation of re-
source nesting, and the design of a resilient error-handling strategy using JAX-RS. You
are expected to demonstrate industry-standard practices, including the use of appropri-
ate HTTP status codes, meaningful JSON responses, and a logical resource hierarchy that
reflects the physical structure of the campus.
Core ”Resource” Data Models:
You will model three primary entities that represent the core pillars of the Smart Campus. Use
these POJOs as your foundation, ensuring they are properly encapsulated with getters and set-
ters:
1
public class Room {
2
private String id;
// Unique identifier , e.g., "LIB -301"
3
private String name;
// Human-readable name, e.g., "Library
Quiet Study"
4
private int capacity;
// Maximum occupancy for safety
regulations
5
private List<String > sensorIds = new ArrayList <>(); // Collection of
IDs of sensors deployed in this room
6
7
// Constructors , getters , setters...
8
}
9
10
public class Sensor {
11
private String id;
// Unique identifier , e.g., "TEMP -001"
12
private String type;
// Category , e.g., "Temperature", "
Occupancy", "CO2"
13
private String status;
// Current state: "ACTIVE", "
MAINTENANCE", or "OFFLINE"
14
private double currentValue; // The most recent measurement recorded
15
private String roomId;
// Foreign key linking to the Room
where the sensor is located.
16
17
// Constructors , getters , setters...
18
}
19
20
public class SensorReading {
21
private String id;
// Unique reading event ID (UUID
recommended)
22
private long timestamp;
// Epoch time (ms) when the reading was
captured
23
private double value;
// The actual metric value recorded by
the hardware
24
25
// Constructors , getters , setters...
26
}
Smart Campus POJO Models
3
2. Coursework Tasks (Step-by-Step)
Part 1: Service Architecture & Setup (10 Marks)
1. Project & Application Configuration (5 Marks):
- Bootstrap a Maven project integrating a JAX-RS implementation (e.g., Jersey) and a lightweight
servlet container or embedded server.
- Implement a subclass of javax.ws.rs.core.Application and use the @ApplicationPath("/api/v1")
annotation to establish your API’s versioned entry point.
- Question: In your report, explain the default lifecycle of a JAX-RS Resource class. Is a
new instance instantiated for every incoming request, or does the runtime treat it as a
singleton? Elaborate on how this architectural decision impacts the way you manage and
synchronize your in-memory data structures (maps/lists) to prevent data loss or race con-
ditions.
2. The ”Discovery” Endpoint (5 Marks):
- Implement a root ”Discovery” endpoint at GET /api/v1. This should return a JSON object
providing essential API metadata: versioning info, administrative contact details, and a
map of primary resource collections (e.g., ”rooms” -> ”/api/v1/rooms”).
- Question: Why is the provision of ”Hypermedia” (links and navigation within responses)
considered a hallmark of advanced RESTful design (HATEOAS)? How does this approach
benefit client developers compared to static documentation?
Part 2: Room Management (20 Marks)
1. Room Resource Implementation (10 Marks):
- Develop a SensorRoom Resource class to manage the /api/v1/rooms path.
- GET /: Provide a comprehensive list of all rooms.
- POST /: Enable the creation of new rooms. Ensure the service returns appropriate feed-
back upon success.
- GET /{roomld}: Allow users to fetch detailed metadata for a specific room.
- Question: When returning a list of rooms, what are the implications of returning only
IDs versus returning the full room objects? Consider network bandwidth and client side
processing.
2. Room Deletion & Safety Logic (10 Marks):
- Implement DELETE /{roomld} to allow room decommissioning.
- Business Logic Constraint: To prevent data orphans, a room cannot be deleted if it still
has active sensors assigned to it. If a deletion is attempted on a room with sensors, your
service must block the request and return a custom error response (as detailed in Part 5).
- Question: Is the DELETE operation idempotent in your implementation? Provide a detailed
justification by describing what happens if a client mistakenly sends the exact same DELETE
request for a room multiple times.
4
Part 3: Sensor Operations & Linking (20 Marks)
1. Sensor Resource & Integrity (10 Marks):
- Implement SensorResource to manage the /api/vl/sensors collection.
- POST /: When a new sensor is registered, your logic must verify that the roomld specified
in the request body actually exists in the system.
- Question: We explicitly use the @Consumes (MediaType.APPLICATION_JSON) annotation on
the POST method. Explain the technical consequences if a client attempts to send data in
a different format, such as text/plain or application/xml. How does JAX-RS handle this
mismatch?
2. Filtered Retrieval & Search (10 Marks):
- Enhance GET /api/vl/sensors to support an optional query parameter named type (e.g.,
GET /api/vl/sensors?type=CO2). If provided, the response must filter the list to only in-
clude matching sensors.
- Question: You implemented this filtering using @QueryParam. Contrast this with an alterna-
tive design where the type is part of the URL path (e.g., /api/vl/sensors/type/CO2). Why
is the query parameter approach generally considered superior for filtering and searching
collections?
Part 4: Deep Nesting with Sub - Resources (20 Marks)
A key requirement is to maintain a historical log of readings for every sensor on campus.
1. The Sub-Resource Locator Pattern (10 Marks):
- In your SensorResource class, implement a sub-resource locator method for the path {sensorld}/readi
This method should return an instance of a dedicated SensorReadingResource class.
- Question: Discuss the architectural benefits of the Sub-Resource Locator pattern. How
does delegating logic to separate classes help manage complexity in large APIs compared
to defining every nested path (e.g., sensors/{id}/readings/{rid}) in one massive con-
troller class?
2. Historical Data Management (10 Marks):
- Within SensorReadingResource, implement GET / to fetch history and POST / to append
new readings for that specific sensor context.
- Side Effect: A successful POST to a reading must trigger an update to the currentValue
field on the corresponding parent Sensor object to ensure data consistency across the
API.
Part 5: Advanced Error Handling, Exception Mapping & Logging (30 Marks)
You must ensure the API is ”leak-proof” it should never return a raw Java stack trace or a default
server error page. Furthermore, the API requires observability through proper request and
response logging. Implement specific Exception Mappers and Filters for these scenarios.
1. Resource Conflict (409) (5 Marks):
- Scenario: Attempting to delete a Room that still has Sensors assigned to it.
5
- Task: Create a custom RoomNotEmptyException. Implement an Exception Mapper that re-
turns an HTTP 409 Conflict with a JSON body explaining that the room is currently occupied
by active hardware.
2. Dependency Validation (422 Unprocessable Entity) (10 Marks):
- Scenario: A client attempts to POST a new Sensor with a roomld that does not exist.
- Task: Create a LinkedResourceNotFoundException. Use an Exception Mapper to return an
HTTP 422 Unprocessable Entity (or a 400 Bad Request).
- Question: Why is HTTP 422 often considered more semantically accurate than a standard
404 when the issue is a missing reference inside a valid JSON payload?
3. State Constraint (403 Forbidden) (5 Marks):
- Scenario: A sensor currently marked with the status ”MAINTENANCE” is physically discon-
nected and cannot accept new readings.
- Task: Create a SensorUnavailableException. Map this to an HTTP 403 Forbidden status
when a POST reading is attempted.
4. The Global Safety Net (500) (5 Marks):
- Task: Implement a ”catch-all” ExceptionMapper<Throwable>. This mapper must intercept
any unexpected runtime errors (e.g., NullPointerException, IndexOutOfBoundsException)
and return a generic HTTP 500 Internal Server Error.
- Question: From a cybersecurity standpoint, explain the risks associated with exposing
internal Java stack traces to external API consumers. What specific information could an
attacker gather from such a trace?
5. API Request & Response Logging Filters (5 Marks):
- Task: Implement API observability by creating a custom filter class that implements both
ContainerRequestFilter and ContainerResponseFilter. Use java.util.logging.Logger
to log the HTTP method and URI from the ContainerRequestContext for every incoming
request, and log the final HTTP status code from the ContainerResponseContext for every
outgoing response.
- Question: Why is it advantageous to use JAX-RS filters for cross-cutting concerns like
logging, rather than manually inserting Logger.info() statements inside every single re-
source method?
6
3. Submission & Marking Breakdown
Professional Practice (Mandatory Prerequisites)
GitHub Hosting: The project must be hosted in a public GitHub repository. Your reposi-
tory must contain a README.md that provides:
- An overview of your API design.
- Explicit, step-by-step instructions on how to build the project and launch the server.
- At least five sample curl commands demonstrating successful interactions with dif-
ferent parts of the API.
Video Demonstration: A maximum of 10-minute video demonstration of postman tests.
The video must be uploaded directly to the BlackBoard submission link. There is no need
to show the coding part. Please note that the video demonstration is mandatory for the
assessment. In the video demonstration, you MUST be present and speak clearly.
Report: The report must be prepared in a PDF format, which must only include the an-
swers to the questions in each part. There is no need to include test cases and an intro-
duction.
Evaluation Criteria
- Part 1 (Setup & Discovery): 10 Marks
- Part 2 (Room Management): 20 Marks
- Part 3 (Sensors & Filtering): 20 Marks
- Part 4 (Sub - Resources): 20 Marks
- Part 5 (Error Handling & Logging): 30 Marks
- Conceptual Report: This document must only contain the written answers to the ques-
tions found in each section of your report. Keep in mind that your report’s overall mark
is influenced by your performance on each task, with 20% of the total score allocated to
answering specific questions. For instance, in task 3.1, you can earn 2 mark out of 10 by
including a proper response to the question posed. Be sure to address these questions
thoroughly to maximise your scores! Please note that the report must be organised and
written in the README.md file on GitHub
- Video Demonstration: Please keep in mind that each task of the coursework requires a
recorded video demonstration to showcase your work. This video demonstration is sig-
nificant, as it accounts for 30% of the total score for each task. For instance, in Task 3.1,
the video demonstration will contribute 3 marks out of the total 10 marks available for
that task. Make sure to put effort into your video presentations, as they are an important
part of your overall assessment. Please note that you should clearly present during the
video presentation. Therefore, it is critical to ensure that your camera and microphone are
working properly. Failing to submit a recorded video presentation will result in a 20% loss
of marks on each task that requires video recording. Please note that the Video Demon-
stration link/File must be included in BlackBoard submission link.
- Coding: Please note that the allocated mark for coding for each section is 50%, which
means that if a section has 10 mark, 5 marks is allocated to coding, 3 mark is allocated to
video demonstration and 2 mark is allocated to answering questions in the report.
7
- Technology Stack: You must only use JAX-RS. Using other technologies like Spring boot
are not allowed, which means that you will receive immediate ZERO mark for the whole
coursework.
- NO ZIP FILE: PLEASE NOTE THAT, SUBMITTING ANY ZIP FILE INSTEAD OF HOSTING THE
APP IN THE GITHUB WILL RESULT IN ZERO MARK FOR THE WHOLE COURSEWORK.
- Database: You are not allowed to use any database technology like SQL Server. Otherwise,
you will receive ZERO mark for the coursework. You must only use data structures like
Hashmap or ArrayList.
8
